Using Large Language Models
Goran Nenadic
Department of Computer Science
COMP34711
Week 9
Slides based on many sources
LLMs: state of the play
◼ Huge progress and impact in NLP
 Numerous application areas and success stories
 In particular in text-to-text and text-to-speech domains (next week)
 Many useful apps: e.g. conversational AI, writing assistants, …
◼ Many large language models produced
 BERT family, GPT, T5, BART, Llama, Claude, Qwen, DeepSeek,
etc. etc.
◼ Many large companies involved
ETHER
SIIM Generative Al
Jasper
Text-to-Image (T21)
Text-to-Video (T2V)
Text-to-Audio (T2A)
Curated by @aaronsiim
DALL-E
Imagen
WOMBO
R runway
Play.ht
2 Stable Diffusion
Midjourney
craiyon
NightCafe
Wonder pixray-text2image
Simplified
Fliki
MURFA
synthesia
RESEMBLE.AI
Jasper
GauGAN2
neural
love
Meta AI Google Al
EleutherAl
Phenaki
WELLSAID descript
frase Requstory
grammarly copy.ai + MarketMuse A121labs HubSpot
Text-to-Text (T2T) InferKit GooseAlI Research Al ws Writesonic co:here CHIBI
Ideas Al
Powred ty OpenAI copysmith Flowrite NICHESSS
odus
write
ideasbyaijbeta text.cortex OpenAl GPT-3 Blog Idea Generator
Text-to-Motion (T2м) TTREE Ind MDM: Human Motion Diffusion Model
Text-to-Code (T2C) replit Generate code GitHub Copilot
Text-to-NFT (T2N)
Text-to-3D (T2D) DreamFusion CLIP-Mesh
LensAI
GET3D
Audio-to-Text (A2T) descript AssemblyAI Whisper
Audio-to-Audio (A2A) AudioLM
VOICEMOD NN
Meta Al
Brain-to-Text (B2T) speech from brain non-invasive brain recordings
Image-to-Text (A2T) neural
.love
OpenAl
GPT-3 x Image Captions
@EtherSiim
LLMs: state of the play
Last 6-7 years https://arxiv.org/pdf/2306.08302.pdf
LLMs: state of the play
As the scale of the model increases, the performance improves
across tasks while also unlocking new capabilities.
https://ai.googleblog.com/2022/04/pathways-language-model-palm-scaling-to.html
Foundation models
◼ Models that are designed to be capable of a range of general tasks (such as
text generation, question answering and audio generation)
 sometimes called ‘general-purpose AI’ or ‘GPAI’
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1569190X2300031X
Foundation models
◼ Pre-training (very) large LMs on enormous, general, diverse data
Pre-trained
Self-supervision to LLM
learn patterns (e.g.
predict the next
word or sentence)
BERTLARGE (340M)
LLaMA (<65B)
GPT-3 (175B)
PaLM (540B)
• Can be built ‘on top of’ to develop different applications:
e.g. (1) via fine-tuning or (2) prompting and in-context learning
Using LLMs – fine tuning
• Use representations learnt by PLMs by adaptation to new domain
or transfer learning to so that they are fine-tuned for new tasks.
• Have brought break-throughs in many NLP tasks.
• Can be hard to tune all parameters since PLMs are larger and
larger.
Using LLMs – fine tuning
https://fsdl.me/2022-lecture-07-slides
Knowledge Destillation
◼ Large models are computationally demanding
◼ Knowledge distillation: a smaller model (the student) - is
trained to keep comparable “knowledge" of a larger
model (the teacher).
 E.g. DistilBERT, TinyBERT etc.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01108
• DistilBERT reduces
the size of a BERT
model by 40%, while
retaining 97% of its
language
understanding
capabilities and
being 60% faster.
Using LLMs – prompting
Instruction (prompt)
Instruction + context
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2808296
(in-context learning)
◼ Prompts involve instructions and context passed to a LM to
achieve a desired task
◼ Components
 Instruction
 Context
 Input
◼ Note: terminology is still being developed and sometimes might be
confusing
 prompt, context, input, instruction, query, input data, …
Prompts and instructions
Prompts and instructions
◼ Prompt engineering: the practice of developing and optimizing
prompts to efficiently use LLMs for a variety of applications
 Often ad-hoc, but good for testing and evaluating the limitations of LLMs
 Can be used for innovative exploration/applications on top of LLMs
◼ Prompt design
 How to present task instructions? What language expressions to use?
◼ You can get very different results with different prompts
 Quality and relevance of the response generated by the LLM is heavily
dependent on the “quality” of the prompt
http://ai.stanford.edu/blog/understanding-incontext/
A Good Prompt is Worth Millions of Parameters:
Low-resource Prompt-based Learning for Vision
Language Models (ACL2022)
Prompts and instructions
◼ Pre-trained language models are sensitive to prompts
 Performance still lags far behind SotA model tuning results
◼ Sub-optimal and sensitive
 prompts that humans consider reasonable is not necessarily effective for
language models
A Good Prompt Is Worth Millions of
Parameters: Low-resource Prompt-baseLearning for Vision Language Models
(ACL2022)
https://people.cs.umass.edu/~miyyer/cs685/slides/prompt_learning.pdf
A single word
change could
yield a drastic
difference
Prompts and instructions
Prompts and instructions
◼ In-context learning (ICL): PLM performs a task just by conditioning
on input-output examples, without optimizing any parameters.
 Components of the prompt provide information for inferring the right latent
concepts that the PLM has acquired from the training data.
◼ Scoring: a function (e.g. conditional probability) to transform
predictions of the PLM to an estimation of the likelihood of a specific
answer, based on the prompt
https://nlplab.tech/blog/in-context-learning-a-new-paradigm-in-nlp/ https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.00234
Prompts and instructions
◼ Warming up – optional
 Benefit: the model becomes more sensitive towards ICL, leading to better ICL
performance.
 Disadvantage: it’s fine tuning, so requires updating the model weights or adding
additional weights to the model
 Supervised in-context training: fine-tune the PLM on a dataset containing a broad
range of tasks prepared in ICL formats similar to the format you would like to use
for your task.
 Self-supervised in-context training: use the frozen PLM to generate some
synthetic training data, then you fine-tune the PLM on that synthetic training data.
https://nlplab.tech/blog/in-context-learning-a-new-paradigm-in-nlp/ https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.00234
Prompts and instructions
◼ Several strategies for context
 Zero-shot prompts
 Few-shot prompts
 Chain-of-thought prompts
◼ Zero-shot: no example of expected
behavior from the model
◼ Few-shots: provide few examples
before posing the actual question
https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/an-introduction-to-large-language-models-prompt-engineering-and-p-tuning
Prompts and instructions
 How to select a subset of examples for in-context learning?
◼ Can introduce bias;
◼ Requires domain expertise
In principle, more shots provide better accuracy
(experimentally), in particular for large LMs
Prompts and instructions
◼ Chain of thought (CoT): help develop “reasoning” by providing some
few-shot examples, where the reasoning process is explained.
 When the LLM answers the prompt, it shows its reasoning process as well.
https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/an-introduction-to-large-language-models-prompt-engineering-and-p-tuning
Prompts and instructions
https://nlpnewsletter.substack.com/p/instruction-tuning-vol-1
• In prompts, a small number of examples can be used, limiting the level of
control
• The examples must be pre-appended, which affects the token budget
Prompting tips
◼ Be specific, clear, and concise.
◼ Include context. Include examples.
◼ Iterate: subsequent prompts are typically needed to either clarify
what you need further. Try paraphrasing.
◼ Give positive instructions instead of "what not to do". Form matters.
◼ Use as domain-specific instructions as possible. Use roles.
◼ Directly address the LLM? ‘Thank you’.
◼ Ask LLM to help and refine the
prompt – ”self-prompting”
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2307.11760.pdf
A Good Prompt is Worth Millions of
Parameters: Low-resource Prompt-based
Learning for Vision Language Models
(ACL2022)
Example: instructions
◼ Use specific directives,
sub-language and specify
exactly what you want.
◼ Roles?
OpenAI Prompt Engineering guide
1. Write Clear Instructions
- Be specific: Clarity in instructions leads to more relevant outcomes. Minimize ambiguity.
- Define the desired output length and complexity. Demonstrate preferred formats.
2. Provide Reference Text
- Counteract potential fabrications with concrete reference materials.
- Reference texts guide the model towards accurate and reliable answers.
3. Split Complex Tasks into Simpler Subtasks
- Break down tasks to reduce errors and improve manageability. Consider tasks as workflows of simpler,
interconnected steps.
4. Give the Model Time to "Think"
- Allow the model to process and reason, similar to a human solving a complex problem.
- Encourage a "chain of thought" approach for more accurate reasoning.
5. Use External Tools
- Supplement the model's capabilities with specialized tools for specific tasks.
- Leverage resources like text retrieval systems or code execution engines.
6. Test Changes Systematically
- Measure improvements with a comprehensive testing approach.
- Ensure that modifications lead to overall performance enhancements.
https://lnkd.in/gcQg3Pii
Prompt learning
◼ How to learn and tune prompts automatically?
◼ Many approaches being investigated
 P-tuning (Liu et al., 2021): encode dependencies between prompt
tokens using a BiLSTM network
 Soft prompts (Qin and Eisner., 2021): use ensemble methods, e.g.,
mixture-of-experts
 Template-based prompts
 Parameter-efficient Prompt
Tuning (PEPT)
 Self-prompting
 …
https://xuyige.github.io/slides/20220504-Prompt.pdf
Training ChatGPT
Instruction tuning
- Align (human) expectations through
Reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF)
- Users helped train GPT-3 (and follow-ups)
by providing instructions/prompts and
labelers than designed and ranked the
expected outcomes to instruction tune the
application using supervised learning
Safety tuning
- Optimised for conversations/dialogue
- Add safety checks – what/how the
application should/should not respond to
https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155
Instruction prompt tuning for Med-PaLM
arXiv:2212.13138v1
Further reading
▪ Ch7 and Ch9 in: Jurafsky, Martin: Speech and
language processing (3
rd edition draft)
▪ In particular 7.1-7.3, 7.5, 9.1 and 9.4
▪ https://web.stanford.edu/~jurafsky/slp3/
◼ (optional) A lot of materials available on Canvas if you
are interested
 Pre-trained models, In-context learning, etc.